# Customize algorithm

{{plato.name}} supports creating and using custom algorithms. This topic describes how to create and use custom algorithms.

## Preparation

- [Install and deploy {{plato.name}}](nebula-analytics.md).
- Install GCC 9.2.0 or later.
- Install CMake 3.10 or later.

## Create custom algorithms

1. Enter the `api/api_example` directory in the {{plato.name}} installation path.

2. Create a custom algorithm file. For example, `test.cpp`.

3. Edit the algorithm content file. You can refer to the `Wcc` and `GetNeighbors` algorithms in the `api/api_example` directory.

  The algorithm implements graph computation through calling the API interface. The API interface is divided into three parts:

  - [AppBase class](2.appbase-class.md)
  - [Graph class](3.graph-class.md)
  - [utils](4.utils-class.md)

4. Save the file, and then compile the algorithm by executing the following command. After successful compilation, a `test.so` file is generated in the `build` directory. If multiple algorithm files are created, multiple `.so` files will be generated.

    ```bash
    mkdir build && cd build
    cmake ..
    make
    ```

5. Move the generated `.so` file into the `algos` directory in the {{plato.name}} installation path. All algorithms in this directory will be automatically loaded when the {{plato.name}} service starts.

  !!! note

        The `.so` files need to be stored on each machine in the {{plato.name}} cluster.

## Create custom algorithm scripts

After the `.so` file is stored, you also need to create a script file to call the `.so` file.

1. Enter the `scripts` directory in the {{plato.name}} installation path.

2. Create a custom algorithm script. For example `test.sh`.

3. Edit the content of the script. You can refer to other scripts in the `scripts` directory.

4. Save the script after editing, and then execute the following command to give the script executable privileges.

    ```bash
    chmod +x test.sh
    ```

5. Store the script file on each machine in the {{plato.name}} cluster.

## Use custom algorithms

After setting up custom algorithms and scripts, you can use the custom algorithms just like the built-in algorithms. For details, see [How to use NebulaGraph Analytics](nebula-analytics.md) .

## Debug custom algorithms

You can check the execution of an algorithm by printing the log by glog. For example:

```bash
VLOG(3) << "vid=" << vid.to_string() << ",label=" << label;
```
